ROADMAP.md: Create our Roadmap (#1484)
testground/testground: ROADMAP.md

# Testground Roadmap

## Context

> Testground is a platform for testing, benchmarking, and simulating distributed and peer-to-peer systems at scale.

> > It's designed to be multi-lingual and runtime-agnostic, scaling gracefully from 2 to 10k instances when needed.

Reviewer: With EKS we only hit 2K, right?

Author: Currently yes

Testground was used successfully at Protocol Labs

- TODO: note on libp2p interop

> - TODO: note on filecooin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- TODO: note on filecoin
```

- TODO: note on IPFS v0.5.0 (massive DHT and Bitswap improvements)
- TODO: note on libp2p (gossipsub 1.1 security extensions)

## Vision

Testground As A Service embodies our long-term vision.

- A single, scalable platform that one or more organizations can use,
- The ability to track the impact of a change in terms of stability & performance across multiple projects,
- The ability to experiment with large-scale networks and simplify the integration testing of libraries used across deep stacks.

> Products with similar ideas:

Reviewer: Do we want to discuss why testground is unique here? Why others are not meeting the requirements?

Author: I'll answer through the doc instead of using a comment, it looks like this now:

---

Products with similar ideas, but specialized in different areas:

- database: [CockroachDB performance tracker](https://cockroachdb.github.io/pebble/?max=local),
- browser: [Webkit Performance Dashboard](https://perf.webkit.org/v3/)

---

Let me know if you think we should add more!

> - [CockroadDB performance tracker](https://cockroachdb.github.io/pebble/?max=local),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [CockroachDB performance tracker](https://cockroachdb.github.io/pebble/?max=local),
```

- [Webkit Performance Dashboard](https://perf.webkit.org/v3/)

## Problems we focus on

> We focus on reliability, usefulness, and sustainability. We want to ensure Testground is valuable and stable before we grow its feature set.

Author: Updated with

---

We focus on the following:

1. Reliability: above all, Testground should be trusted by its users,
2. Usefulness: solving needs that have been requested explicitly by projects,
3. Sustainability: implementing the processes & tools we need to maintain Testground in the medium and long term.

We want to ensure Testground is valuable and stable before we grow its feature set.

---

### Table of Content

- [1. Testground provides reliable results](#1-testground-provides-reliable-results)
- [2. Testground can be set up as an organization-wide Service](#2-testground-can-be-set-up-as-an-organization-wide-service)
- [3. The knowledge required to work efficiently with Testground is available and easy to access](#3-the-knowledge-required-to-work-efficiently-with-testground-is-available-and-easy-to-access)
- [4. Testground Development follows high-standard](#4-testground-development-follows-high-standard)
- [5. Testground provides the networking tooling required to test complex Distributed / Decentralized Applications](#5-testground-provides-the-networking-tooling-required-to-test-complex-distributed--decentralized-applications)
- [6. Testground provides the tooling to make test maintenance & finding issues simple](#6-testground-provides-the-tooling-to-make-test-maintenance--finding-issues-simple)

> - [7. Testground covers every /essential/combination of languages and libraries required by its users](#7-testground-covers-every-essentialcombination-of-languages-and-libraries-required-by-its-users)

Reviewer: What's up with the `/`s?

Author: draft-ish italics, fixed

### 1. Testground provides reliable results

**Why:** an unreliable testing platform is just a noise machine. We need to secure our users' trust. Testground maintainers need clear feedback about stability improvements & regressions.

#### Milestone 1: We have a stability metrics dashboard

> Maintainers and users have a way to measure and follow Testground's Stability over any "relevant" axis.

Author: Updated to use the term `false negative` (we expect zero `false positive`, they are critical bugs).

This might combine different languages, runners (k8s, docker, local), and context (developer env, CI env, k8s env).

#### Milestone 2: We have identified and reached our user's stability requirements. We resolved "most" of them

- local runner,
- docker runner,
- EKS runner,

#### Milestone 3: We have a performances dashboard

> Maintainers and users have a way to measure and follow Testground's Performances over any "relevant" axis.

Reviewer: What would that be?

Author: That would be the first task: define these axes.

### 2. Testground can be set up as an organization-wide Service

**Why:** We believe Testground can provide value across entire organizations. Making it easy to run a large-scale workload and efficient small-scale CI tests are core to its success.

#### Milestone 1: We can use Testground EKS clusters in production

- Deploy
- Security
- Stability

#### Milestone 2: We can measure and improve Testground's EKS stability

- Deploying short-lived clusters for benchmarking

> #### Milestone 3: We can measure and improve Testground's EKS performances

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Milestone 3: We can measure and improve Testground's EKS performance
```

- Deploying short-lived clusters for benchmarking

> #### Milestone 4: Dashboard & CI Toolings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Milestone 4: Dashboard & CI Tooling
```

What kind of tooling are we thinking of?

### 3. The knowledge required to work efficiently with Testground is available and easy to access

**Why:** We believe testing is valuable when everyone on the team can contribute. Our platform has to be approachable.

Related - [EPICS 1741](https://github.com/testground/testground/issues/1471).

#### Milestone 1: There is a working quickstart that is the entry point to every other documentation

> #### Milestone 2: Testground has an official release process

Author: Agreed, I moved the section,
plus that's a double win for ipdx: we can dogfood unified ci improvements.

- We distribute versions following an explicit release process (no more `:edge` by default)
- It's easy to follow changes (CHANGELOG)
- We distribute binaries

#### Milestone 3: Testground provides extensive documentation

- The documentation is up-to-date
  - Generates configuration documentation
- We provide introduction guides for every language
- We provide doc for Common Patterns

#### Milestone 4: Potential users know about Testground's existence and features

- "Public Relations".

### 4. Testground Development follows high-standard

**Why:** Testground has already provided value amongst many different projects. Now, we need bulletproof development processes to make the project sustainable and facilitate external contributions.

> #### Testground CI & Testing is practical and reliable

Reviewer: Are we dropping "milestones" pattern here on purpose?

Author: Yes, there are no strong dependencies between these tasks here.

(I feel like this should be a top-level point)

- We use a single CI (GitHub CI)
- Refactor the testing to be easier to use and simpler to maintain

>   - remove shell scripts

Author: (rewritten taking this into account)

- Plan for testing EKS
- Measure & remove flakiness

#### I have all the documentation I need as a Maintainer

- public specifications
- public discussions
- community gatherings

#### Efficient Project Management and Project Visibility

- We have a single maintainer team for review,
- We have a clear label and triaging process,
- We have a reliable & transparent contribution process (protected branches, etc),

> - We have precise project management tooling (re-ignite ZenHub?)

Reviewer: Any reason to go beyond GitHub Projects?

Author: Reword for:

> - We have precise project management tooling (port previous ZenHub planning into Github?)

### 5. Testground provides the networking tooling required to test complex Distributed / Decentralized Applications

**Why:** This is Testground's main feature.

#### Milestone 1: ExplicitNetwork Simulation Support

There is a clear matrix of what features can be used with which Testground runner.

- MTU issues, networking simulation, etc.
- This will be a Matrix of feature x runner x precision (transport level, application level, etc.).

> #### Milestone 2: Testground provides support for important networks topologies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Milestone 2: Testground provides support for important network topologies
```

- Access to public networks - [issue 1472](https://github.com/testground/testground/issues/1472)
- NAT simulation - [issue 1299](https://github.com/testground/testground/issues/1299)
- Complex topologies - [issue 1354](https://github.com/testground/testground/issues/1354)

#### Milestone 3: Testground provides a way to run tests over real networks

> - Remote runners feature

Reviewer: Link to notion?

Author: (fixed @galargh, I added links to notion and @MarcoPolo's PR)
@marten-seemann brought this up too, I'll leave it as is for discussion

### 6. Testground provides the tooling to make test maintenance & finding issues simple

**Why:**

- composition files specification and improvements -
- Logging improvements - [Epic 1355](https://github.com/testground/testground/issues/1355)
- tcpdump'ing features - [Issue #1384](https://github.com/testground/testground/issues/1384)

### 7. Testground covers every /essential/combination of languages and libraries required by its users

**Why:** Drive adoptions outside of Protocol Labs.

> #### We support the primary languages needed by our users

Reviewer: Should we consider improving the experience of using testground using an "unsupported" language as an alternative?

- Provide a simple matrix about which languages and builders are supported and how
  - example: go support = great, nodejs support = deprecated, python support = non existent
- Provide a way to raise requests for more language support
- Provide an example  + SDK for "most" languages using `docker:generic`
  - `rust`,  `browser`, `nim`, `python`,
- Provide an official `docker:xxxx` builder for "most" languages (`docker:rust`, `docker:browser`)
  - This will require deep knowledge of the packaging systems and how to do library rewrites, etc. See the `lipb2p/test-plans` rust support for this.

#### We support the tooling needed to run interop tests in CI

- Custom setup & composition generation scripts

#### We Support SDK Implementers

- Record every known SDK and its level of maintenance in an official "awesome-testground" page
  - example: nim-sdk.
- Provide instructions and a path for SDK implementers

## Later

### Testground is used at ProtocolLabs to measure performances

> ### Testground security is top-notch

Reviewer: This seems to be a bit far down the list :P

Reviewer 2: Got it.  I think this is more of a distraction.  I would remove it.

  * [6. Testground provides the tooling to make identifying and fixing issues easy.](#6-testground-provides-the-tooling-to-make-identifying-and-fixing-issues-easy)
  * [7. Testground covers every /essential/ combinations of languages and libraries required by its users](#7-testground-covers-every--essential--combinations-of-languages-and-libraries-required-by-its-users)

## 1. Testground provides reliable results

**Why:** A testing platform that is unreliable is just a noise-producing machine. We need to secure our users' trust. Testground maintainers need clear feebdacks about stability improvements & regressions.

### Milestone 1: We have a stability metrics dashboard

Maintainers and users have a way to measure and follow Testground's Stability over any "relevant" axis.

This might combine different languages, runners (k8s, docker, local), and context (developer env, CI env, k8s env).

### Milestone 2: Every known stability issue has been solved

- local runner,
- docker runner,
- EKS runner,

> ### Milestone 3: We have a performances dashboard

Author: I don't know: Testground performance is a topic we care about and we'll focus on it after we're done with stability, but deciding which metrics we measure, and under which conditions, is part of the problem.

> ### Milestone 3: We have a performances dashboard

Author: (I updated the doc with a note)

---

Maintainers and users have a way to measure and follow Testground's Performances over any "relevant" axis. This effort will start with identifying which metrics we want to measure first.

It might contain:

- Raw build / run performance for synthetic workload
- Performance of real-life usage in CI (like `libp2p/test-plans`)
- Consideration for caching features, re-building, etc.

---

Maintainers and users have a way to measure and follow Testground's Performances over any "relevant" axis.

> ## 2. Testground can be set up as an organization-wide Service

Reviewer 3: Looking at the milestones, this section seems to be entirely about EKS.

Author: Pretty much, anything wrong?

> **Why:** We believe Testground can provide value accross entire organizations. Making it easy to run large-scale workload and efficient small-scale CI tests is core to it's success.

Author: Thanks for the correction @marten-seemann, I'll pass the file through Grammarly before un-drafting the doc!

- Deploying short-lived clusters for benchmarking

### Milestone 3: We can measure and improve Testground's EKS performances
- Deploying short-lived clusters for benchmarking

### Milestone 4: Dashboard & CI Toolings

## 3. The knowledge required to work efficiently with Testground is available and easy to access

**Why:** We believe test is valuable when everyone in the team can contribute to testing. The platform has to be approachable.

Related - [EPICS 1741](https://github.com/testground/testground/issues/1471).

### Milestone 1: There is a working quickstart that is the entry point to every other documentation

### Milestone 2: Testground has an official release process

- We distribute versions following an explicit release process (no more `:edge` by default)
- It's easy to follow changes (CHANGELOG)
- We distribute binaries

### Milestone 3: Testground provides extensive documentation

- The documentation is up-to-date
    - Generates configuration documentation
- We provide introduction guides for every language
- We provide doc for Common Patterns

### Milestone 4: Potential users know about Testground's existence and features

- "Public Relations".

> ## 4. Testground Developement follows high-standard

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## 4. Testground Development follows high-standard
```

- public specifications
- public discussions
- community gatherings

### Efficient Project Management and Project Visibility

- We have a single maintainer team for review,
- We have a clear label and triaging process,
- We have a clear contribution process (protected branches, etc),
- We have precise project management tooling (re-ignite ZenHub?)

## 5. Testground provides the networking tooling required to test complex Distributed / Decentralized Applications

**Why:** This is a main selling point for Testground.

### Milestone 1: ExplicitNetwork Simulation Support

There is a clear matrix of what features can be used with which Testground runner.

- MTU issues, networking simulation, etc.
- This will be a Matrix of feature x runner x precision (transport level, application level, etc.).

### Milestone 2: Testground provides support for important networks topologies
- Access to public networks - [issue 1472](https://github.com/testground/testground/issues/1472)
- NAT simulation - [issue 1299](https://github.com/testground/testground/issues/1299)
- Complex topologies - [issue 1354](https://github.com/testground/testground/issues/1354)

> ### Milestone 3: Testground provides a way to run tests over real networks

Reviewer 3: Does this depend on the other milestones, or is this a prioritization? Should this be its own top-level goal?

Author: (resolving, roadmap was rewritten with clearer ordering)

IPFS' massive DHT and Bitswap improvement, and Filecoin improvements. Today, we are actively working on it to support libp2p interoperability testing.

### About the Roadmap

This document consists of two sections:

- [Milestones](#milestones) is the list of key improvements we intend to release with dates and deliverables. It is the "deliverable" oriented slice of our plan.
- [Appendix: Problems we focus on](#appendix-problems-we-focus-on) is the list of areas of improvement we intend to focus on. Some contain a few examples of milestones. It is the "problem" oriented slice of our plan and might cover multiple releases and multiple "milestones".

There is an issue dedicated to [Tracking Discussions around this Roadmap](https://github.com/testground/testground/issues/1491).

The timeline we share is our best-educated guess (not a hard commitment) around when we plan to provide critical improvements.

Where possible, we've shared a list of deliverables for every Milestone. These lists are not exhaustive or definitive; they aim to create a sense of "what are concrete outcomes" delivered by an improvement.

> As we agree on this Roadmap and refine it, we'll create & organize missing  EPICs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we agree on this Roadmap and refine it, we'll create & organize missing EPICs.
```

Making Testground project management sustainable is [one of our key milestones](#3-improve-our-development--testing-infrastructure-to-meet-engineering-standards).

## Vision

_This section is still a very high-level draft_

Testground As A Service embodies our long-term vision.

- A single, scalable, installation that one or more organizations can use in all their projects,
- The ability to experiment with large-scale networks and simplify the integration testing of "any" network-related code,
- The ability to track the impact of a change in terms of stability & performance across multiple projects,

>   - An example: having the ability to run IPFS benchmarks and simulations with different combinations of libraries. This would help us measure regression and improvements as soon as they occur in upstream dependencies.

Reviewer: I don't quite get this example. Isn't it already kind of solved? A new library is released. Dependabot makes a PR to Kubo to upgrade the dependency. We run a benchmark to see how it's doing comparing to release, master, etc. on the PR.

When I read the line above the example, the first thing I thought about was testing in the opposite direction. I make a change in a library, how is it going to affect my users.

Side note: Do we want to/are we already having a discussion on what kind of testing testground should be focused on? Correctness, performance, etc? I imagine at some point we'd want to have a list of testing tools (testground, thunderdome, etc.) and the usecases they are the best at.

Author: (let's talk about this)

> Side note: Do we want to/are we already having a discussion on what kind of testing testground should be focused on? Correctness, performance, etc? I imagine at some point we'd want to have a list of testing tools (testground, thunderdome, etc.) and the usecases they are the best at.

That deserves a whole discussion with the Thunderdome team.

Products with similar ideas but specialized in different areas:

- database: [CockroachDB performance tracker](https://cockroachdb.github.io/pebble/?max=local),
- browser: [Webkit Performance Dashboard](https://perf.webkit.org/v3/)

> Researchs and Templates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Research and Templates
```

- [Mockup for the Testground Dashboard](https://github.com/testground/testground/issues/133#issuecomment-553538029)

## Our Focus for 2022-2023

We focus on the following:

> 1. Reliability: above all, Testground should be trusted by its users,
> 2. Sustainability: implementing the processes & tools we need to maintain Testground in the medium and long term.
> 3. Usefulness: solving needs that have been requested explicitly by projects,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Reliability: above all, Testground should be trusted by its users;
2. Sustainability: implementing the processes & tools we need to maintain Testground in the medium and long term;
3. Usefulness: solving needs that have been requested explicitly by projects.
```

**Deliverables:**

- Tooling to support interoperability testing (mixed-builders, composition templating),
- Stability measurements & fixes to reach the libp2p team's expectations,
- A fully working example (ping test) used in go-libp2p and rust-libp2p CIs,
- An interoperability Dashboard that shows how implementations and versions are tested.

### 2. Refresh Testground's EKS support

- Delivery: Q4 2022
- Theme: usefulness
- Effort: approx. 6 months

**Why:** Testground can simulate small networks in CI, but it covers more use cases when it lives in a larger cluster. When we run Testgroun in Kubernetes, we can support whole organizations through the Testground As A Service product.

Using a managed service (Amazon's Elastic Kubernetes Service) means our maintenance costs are lower, and the team can focus on improvements.

**Deliverables:**

- An EKS installation script,
  - Extra care is taken on Network infrastructure (CNIs).

> - A (fixed) Kubernetes runner that runs on Amazon's EKS,

Reviewer: Does this one entail actually having a running cluster PL projects can submit jobs to? I think maybe it deserves a separate deliverable.

Reviewer: I see, it's another milestone!

- The team can use the latest Testground version, create new releases, and upgrade the cluster.

### 3. Improve our Development & Testing infrastructure to meet engineering standards

- Delivery: Q1 2023
- Theme: reliability & sustainability
- Effort: approx. 4 months

**Why:** Testground proved itself valuable multiple times over the years. However, now we need bulletproof development processes to make the project sustainable and facilitate external contributions.

Extra care is taken on Testing and Stability: we are building a testing platform, and Testground's testing must be impeccable.

**Deliverables:**

- Automated release process with official releases, binary distribution, and Changelogs - [EPIC 1430](https://github.com/testground/testground/issues/1430)
- Well-defined Project management processes like triaging, contribution & reviewing processes, etc.
- Documentations for maintainers,
- Maintainable integration testing tooling (no more shell scripts or flakiness),

> - A Stability Dashboard used to identify regression & discuss improvement with Maintainers and Users,

Reviewer: I get why we included the discussion part in this point but I think it might not be immediately obvious for someone less embedded in the testground project.

Author: (1:1 discussion: we'll wait for users feedbacks)

- Tooling for EKS testing.

> ### 4. Provide a Testground As A Service Cluster used by libp2p & ipfs teams

Reviewer: Wouldn't it make more sense to put 2 and 4 next to each other?

- Delivery: Q3 2023
- Theme: usefulness
- Effort: approx. 4 months

> **Why:** Improving experience with faster testing in user's CI. Cover more use cases with large-scale networks.

Reviewer: I don't think it's immediately obvious where the speed advantage is coming from. I think we should emphasise that EKS enables tests on much bigger scale and that it makes it easier to set up testground in new projects.

Side note: when thinking about tests on EKS, we should think not only of CI but also of devs initiating the tests.

**Deliverables:**

- A _stable_ cluster,
- Authentication,
- Tooling for users to use EKS cluster in their testing,
- Integration of the EKS feature in our testing infrastructure

>   - Short-lived clusters used during integration testing

Reviewer: With ~30 minute setup and no support for multiple clusters in the same region, I think we're a long way from that.

Author: (resolved)

### 5. Testground Is Usable by Non-Testground experts

- Delivery: Q4 2023
- Theme: sustainability
- Effort: approx. 8 months

> **Why:** Testground is an Open Source project, and the more project that uses it, the more improvement we'll see. We want to drive adoption outside of Protocol Labs but also encourage contribution. Other organizations have picked up the tool and started contributing; we want to lower friction and strike the Iron while it's hot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Why:** Testground is an Open Source project, and the more projects that use it there are, the more external contributions we'll see. We want to drive adoption outside of Protocol Labs and encourage contributions. Other organizations have picked up the tool and started contributing; we want to lower the friction and strike the iron while it's hot.
```

I also feel like this is not quite capturing `Testground Is Usable by Non-Testground experts`. It seems to be more about external adoption and contributions rather than being beginner friendly.

Reviewer: > If we attract more people to use Testground, we'll have more contributions to the project because Testground is an Open Source project.

**Deliverables:**

- Working Examples (tested in CI)
- Documentation [EPICS 1741](https://github.com/testground/testground/issues/1471).

>   - Updated documentation infrastructure

Reviewer: Is it about automation of documentation setup or documenting infrastructure?

Author: (resolved during sync, we're talking about documentation infrastructure)

  - Quickstart guides

>   - Updated Examples & Tested in CI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Updated examples which are tested in CI
```

- Reliable Network simulation in Docker and EKS
  - Access to public networks - [issue 1472](https://github.com/testground/testground/issues/1472)
  - NAT simulation - [issue 1299](https://github.com/testground/testground/issues/1299)
  - Complex topologies - [issue 1354](https://github.com/testground/testground/issues/1354)
  - Network Simulation Fixes - [Epic 1492](https://github.com/testground/testground/issues/1492)
- Remote-Runners for transport Benchmarking
  - See [Notion](https://www.notion.so/pl-strflt/Remote-Runners-c4ad4886c4294fb6a6f8afd9c0c5b73c) design,
  - And [PR 1425](https://github.com/testground/testground/pull/1425) preliminary work.
- Performance benchmarking tooling
- Debug tooling
  - tcpdump-related features - [Issue #1384](https://github.com/testground/testground/issues/1384)
- Composition Improvements

## Appendix: Problems we focus on

### 1. Testground provides reliable results

**Why:** an unreliable testing platform is just a noise machine. We need to secure our users' trust. In addition, testground maintainers need clear feedback about stability improvements & regressions.

> - We expect strictly zero false positives (a test succeeds because Testground missed an error); these are critical bugs we already test for.

Reviewer: > these are critical bugs we already test for

Could you let me know which tests are you talking about here?

- However, Testground users might encounter false negatives (a test fails because Testground encountered an issue). Our stability metrics will measure this.

#### Milestone 1: We have a stability metrics dashboard

Maintainers and users have a way to measure and follow Testground's Stability over any "relevant" axis.

This might combine different languages, runners (k8s, docker, local), and contexts (developer env, CI env, k8s env).

This dashboard will explicitly describe what to expect regarding false negatives (when an error is caused by Testground itself and not by the plan or the test).

> #### Milestone 2: We have identified and reached our user's stability requirements. We resolved "most" of them

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Milestone 2: We have identified and reached our user's stability requirements. We met "most" of them
```

- local runner,
- docker runner,
- EKS runner,

> #### Milestone 3: We have a performances dashboard

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Milestone 3: We have a performance dashboard
```

> Maintainers and users have a way to measure and follow Testground's Performances over any "relevant" axis. Therefore, this effort will start with identifying which metrics we want to measure first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Maintainers and users have a way to measure and follow Testground's Performance over any "relevant" axis. Therefore, this effort will start with identifying which metrics we want to measure first.
```

- "Public Relations".

### 4. Testground Development follows high-standard

**Why:** Testground has already provided value amongst many different projects. Now, we need bulletproof development processes to make the project sustainable and facilitate external contributions.

#### Testground CI & Testing is practical and reliable

(I feel like this should be a top-level point)

- We use a single CI (GitHub CI)
- Refactor the testing to be easier to use and simpler to maintain
  - remove shell scripts
- Plan for testing EKS
- Measure & remove flakiness

#### Testground has an official release process

- We distribute versions following an explicit release process (no more `:edge` by default)
- It's easy to follow changes (CHANGELOG)
- We distribute binaries
- The release process is automated

#### I have all the documentation I need as a Maintainer

- public specifications
- public discussions
- community gatherings

#### Efficient Project Management and Project Visibility

- We have a single maintainer team for review,
- We have a clear label and triaging process,
- We have a reliable & transparent contribution process (protected branches, etc),

> - We have precise project management tooling (port previous ZenHub planning into Github?)

Reviewer: Do we already have things in ZenHub? I feel like I'm missing something here.
